Let us go back and look at Divide and Conquer
again.
So, recall the divide and conquer paradigm
consists of breaking up a problem into disjoint
subproblems. Then, we solve each of these
subproblems separately and then we combine
them efficiently to form a solution to the
original form. So, we have seen two examples
of divide and conquer, merge sort is a classic
example of divided conquer, where we divide
the list to be sorted of the array to be sorted
into equal parts.
We sort these two parts separately and then,
we efficiently merge them, into a sorted list.
Quick sort has the different strategy, what
it tries to do is avoid the merging step.
So, you rearrange the original list, so that
you have a lower and upper partition with
respect to a pivot. Having rearranged them,
you can sort the lower half and the upper
half independently and now, because they already
rearranged, you do not have to merge them.
So, basically there is a cost involve with
setting up this sub problems and a cost to
involved with combining the subproblems. And
if this set up cost and combination cost is
efficient, then the overall solution gives
you something much better than a direct approach
could.
So, let us look at the following situation,
very often when you go to an online store,
you find a recommendation. For example, it
would say, the customers like you who were
interested in books like these or customers
who bought this phone also look for this pair
of head phones. So, these services are recommended
to you based on your profile, your online
service maintains some profile information
about what you like and what you do not like.
It compares what you likes and do not like
with others and identifies the similar category
of people.
And then, it looks for products or services
that category has opted for, which you have
not and then recommends these three. So, fundamental
step in such a recommendations system is that
of comparing profiles, how does one persons
likes, how do one persons likes and dislikes
compare to those of others.
So, one instance of this is when you have
preferences over things like movies or books,
so suppose over the sequence of time, you
have gone to some website and entered your
preferences about movies that you watch. So,
say there are five movies, let us just call
them A, B, C, D and E which both you and somebody
else have ranked on this website.
So, you in general, two individual who come
up with different rankings. So, perhaps you
rank D first and E last and your friend ranked
B first and E last. So, you both agreed that
E was the worst, but you disagree on whether
B or D was better. In fact, your friend thinks
D was so bad, that is actually only next E
and from the bottom. So, D which was your
first has become your friends 4th.
So, now what we can do is we can take two
such sets of rankings and ask how similar
or dissimilar they are. So, one way of measuring
this is to compare how you rank pairs of movies.
So, for each pair of movies, you can compare
whether you rank one better than the other
and your friend also does or you done. So,
here for instants, if you look at B and C,
then this is ranked in a similar way by you
and your friend.
On the other hand, if you looked at D and
B, then in one case, you rank D above B and
your friend rank B above D. So, we do not
particularly care how far a part there are,
how many other things there are, we are just
saying given choice of two things, which do
you would prefer, which does your friend prefer
and combine the choices across all the choices
available in the given list.
So, what we are trying to do is measure the
dissimilarity in terms of what we call inversion.
How many pairs of movies or rank in the opposite
way between you and your friend? So, if you
and your friend rank every pair of movies
in the same order, then your total order of
performances must be the same. So, if there
are zero inversions, then you have exactly
similar in your taste to your friend and the
rankings are identical.
On the other hand, if you have n movies, then
you can do n choice, n choose to pairs. So,
the number of different pairs of movies are
n choose 2 which is n into n minus 1 by 2.
So, if every possible movie you disagree with
your friend, then the number of inversions
will be n into n minus n by 2, which is an
order n squared. So, you can use now this
as a measure, how many pairs are out of order,
as a measure of how similar or dissimilar,
two sets of rankings are and this could be
used for instance in this recommendation since
to decide which customers to compare in making
a recommendation. So, you only want to pick
customers who are close to the one, whose
recommendation is being made. There is no
point recommending something that the personal
is not going to like because you comparing
it with somebody who has very different taste.
So, we can formulate this in another way.
So, now, we take our ranking and we assume
that is the given order. So, we pick the certain
order for the movies and we call that the
basic ranking 1, 2, 3, 4 up to n. Now, our
friends ranking would rank what we called
1 as may be 5, what we call 2 is may be 3
and so on. So, everything that we rank with
a rank i will be ranked where different rank
j by our friend and of course, every rank
will appear there somewhere or the other.
So, the friends ranking will be a permutation
of 1 to n and what you are asking is if I
rank i before j, that is before i is the smaller
number than j, does the friend rank j before
i, any such think would be an inversion. So,
inversion would be a pair i comma j in my
list, where i smaller than j. So, my list
i is ahead of j, but in my friends list, j
appears before i in that permutation.
Let us look at this little more concretely.
So, supposing this was our original example.
So, there was 5 movies A, B, C, D, E and I
rank them and you rank them is D, B, C, A,
E. Then, I would say D is 1, B is 2, C is
3 A is 4 and E is 5. So, this is my original
list 1 to 5. Now, because I have this correspondence
between the movies and that things and the
rankings, then I know that the D for a since
is 2. So, B is 2, A is 4, C is 3, D is 1 and
E is 5.
So, from this list of preferences, I can rewrite
it as a reordering of my ranking and now,
we are asking when whether there are pairs
like this 2 and 1. So, 2 appear before 1 and
my friends list, it appears after 1 obviously
in the original list, so this is an inversion.
So, 2, 1 is inversion, likewise 4, 1 is inversion,
so it is 3, 1, so we have these three inversion,
whether we have write them as 1 of 2, 1; 3
of 3, 1, because these are pairs, so it was
in order is not important, these pairs of
movies a rank oppositely by you and your friend.
And the final inversion in this particular
example is 3 and 4, so 3 and 4 appear in opposite
order, you can check therefore, every other
pair for example, 4, 5 or 2, 3 or 2, 4 the
order is preserved. So, there are four inversions
in this particular list between your ranking
and your friends ranking and our goal is to
count this number of inversions given to permutations.
So, another way of thinking about this, though
it will not materially affect how we compute
it, is to draw this kind of a graph. So, you
take the rankings to start with as the correct
order on top. So, you have one set of vertices
1 to 5 and then, you have to permutation of
the vertices 1 to 5 listed in the order of
your friends ranking. And then, you combine
1 to 1, 2 to 2 and so on, so that you build
up in the graph which as if you have 5 on
top and 5 in the bottom, you have 5 edges,
if you have n and n you have n edges.
Now, in this graph every time a line crosses
this indicates a mismatch, so 2 has a gone
ahead of 1, likewise 4 is gone ahead of 3
and so on. So, there are 4 crossing is between
these lines and that really corresponds to
four inversions in this example. So, now,
there is a very simple brute force way to
check, because we know that every inversion
is a pair i j, such that j appears before
i my friends list.
So, we can just check that, we can just check
for every i and every j which is different
from i, whether i and j is an inversion and
this will give us a Brute force order n squared
algorithm. So, this actually enumerates all
the inversions, it is checks every possible
pairs and if it is an inversion it says yes,
if it is not an inversion it says no and then,
you count how many inversions you solve. And
we saw and that we can actually in the worst
case have complete set n into n minus 1 by
2 inversions. So, this will exhaustedly enumerate
every inversion in check it with yes or no.
So, our goal is to give a more efficient algorithm,
so we will move to this divide and conquer
paradigm. So, suppose your friend’s permutation,
our permutation always 1 to n, so we can just
assume it is given. So, what is early interesting
is our friends permutation, so the friends
permutation is some order of 1 to n jumbled
up, let us call it i 1 to i n.
So, now, we will do something similar to merge
sort, so you will take this list i 1 to i
n and divide in two parts. So, we have i 1
to i n by 2 which is the left and i n by 2
plus 1 to n which is the right. So, divide
and conquer is a very simple minded strategy,
you can only do one thing, you can solve this
and then, you can combine. So, this is the
basic paradigm, so you have to divide, solve
the divided parts and combine.
So, we will recursively assume that we can
count the inversions in left and right. Now,
what is left to count are those inversions
which cross the boundaries. So, is there at
j, i pair that is looks like this. This would
not be counted when I count only the left,
because i is not in the left, it will not
be count only in the right, because j is not
in the right. So, there would be an inversion
give i is less than j as numbers, but j appears
in the left, i appears in the right.
So, this has to be done after we are solve
the recursively, so this is basically the
combinations step, how many elements in the
right are bigger than elements in the left.
Anything on the left, if it is smaller than
something on the right, then it is not an
inversion, because it is already in the correct
order in the overall list. But, it something
on the right is bigger than something on the
left, then that is an inversion, we have to
count all such pairs.
So, in order to solve this, we will make or
recursive procedure a little stronger than
just counting. So, we will assume that not
only doings count in the two halves; we sort
them well we were counting. So, what happens
is now we have divide our problem in two parts
and then, we come back, so this is my L and
this is my R, I have now sorted L sorted R
and I have a counter, so I have a count L
and a count R.
Now, the factors these are sorted, means that
I can do some kind of merging. So, I can use
a version of merge. So, we will describe a
version of merging which allows us to count.
So, this gives as other count and then, we
have three counts the left count the right
count and the count return by merge and so
what you want to a merging is to actually
check how many elements on the right or bigger
than how many elements on the left.
So, how do we do this? So, what is the principle
of merge and count? So, remember that an inversion
across L and R consist of an element in R.
So, we have an element in R and an element
in L, such that this number is smaller than
this number. So, we have some i here and some
j here, such that i is smaller than j. So,
what will happen in a merge procedure is at
some point, so we are merging, so we pick
the smaller of these two and pulled out.
So, any time now if I had pulled out an element
from here; that means, at this current point
I have merge up to this an up to this. So,
there are two pointers in my list left and
right, sorted list, up to which the merged
is proceeded so far. Now, at this point I
choose the right hand side element, because
it is smaller. So, if it is smaller than,
it is smaller than everything which I not
yet looked at, that is why, because it is
smaller than the first element I am looking
at in L. Therefore, smaller everything else
in L, because everything else in L is sorted
with respect to this.
So, therefore, this entire segment which is
left in L, corresponds to elements which are
smaller than the current element am pulling
out from R. In other words, this element in
R contributes as many inversion as there are
elements in L at the point when it is extracted
in the merge process. So, whenever I add an
element from R to the output, it is inverted
with respect to the all the elements currently
in L. So, I should add the current size of
L to the number of inversions.
So, this gives as are merge and count, while
we are merging, every time we pull from the
left, there is no inversion, every time pull
in the right, we see how many elements are
still remaining in the left and that many
items need to be added to our inversion part.
So, here is a merge procedure for merge and
count which is very similar to the merge procedure
in the basic merge sort. So, we had two list
A and B to be merged, both are sorted and
A has m elements and B has n elements and
we want to produce an output list C, which
has m plus n element. So, we begin with assigning
a pointer to tell us how far we have gone
on each list, we just set as 0. And now, we
have to keep track of the number of inversions,
so we keep a variable called count which is
initialized 0, the total number of inversions
which have been seen so far.
So, along the something is there to move into
C, we move something, so there are two cases,
the first cases to move from A. So, I have
B is empty, j is equal to n are the element
of the head of A, A i is smaller than equal
to B j in which case we do the usual think,
we copy the ith element of A into C k and
then, we increment both i and k. The other
cases when either A is an empty, i is equal
to m or B j as a smaller value, in this case
we have possibly an inversion.
So, how many inversions do we have, we have
exactly m minus i inversions, we have as many
inversions as so this is i, we have as many
inversions as are elements currently in A,
which is m minus i. Now, notices that in the
specific case where we are copying from B,
because A is empty, we have i equal to m.
So, this would actually be 0. So, they should
not be an inversion, if they are just duplicating
B and C, because A is exhausted.
So, that is also taken care of the m minus
i being 0, so although we are updating the
count, we are assuming not adding in it. So,
only we are doing an nontrivial merge that
is when we are moving something from B, when
A is still not empty do we increment the count,
we are moving because we are run out the elements
in a count to remains these same. So, the
end of this merge procedure, we return these
number of inversions we saw plus the merge
list.
So, now, we incorporate or merge procedure
into the merge sort with counting as follows.
As usual, we will sort in general an array
from some left index to some right index,
because we would sort different segments at
different times. So, if the current segment
is to be sorted as length 1, then there is
nothing to be done, we just set up a new,
the sorted segment is just the value that
we see and there is no inversion, because
there is only one value.
On the other hand, if it is bigger than 1,
then we compute the midpoint and we do these
two recursive calls, each of them will return
the count on the left and right respectively,
then we call or merge procedure and get a
count from the merge section. So, then our
total number of inversions is the count from
the left and the right count from the merge
together and the new array is the one return
by the merge. So, this is the very simple
extension of merge sort which allows us to
count inversions which is useful for a recommendations
system.
So, the analysis of course, given that the
structure resources is similar to merge sort,
the analysis is similar, we have this recursion
for the time taken on n steps. So, T of 1
is 1 and T of n is 2 times T n by 2 plus n
exactly. So, merge sort because it only take
as a linear time to merge sort with count.
So, you merge with count it takes a same amount
of time as merging without counted, so we
solve this and we get n log n.
Now, an important think to note is when we
did are Brute force calculation, we looked
at every possible pair and decided whether
are not it is an inversion, so they actually
explicitly counted the inversions to get the
answer. Now, here we are doing it an n log
n which is potentially much smaller than the
number of inversion you want to get. So, we
are actually counting the number of inversions
or estimating or actually calculating how
many inversions are there without actually
counting them manually one by one. Because,
they could be a n squared inversions, but
use there are n squared inversions, we could
find that out in n log n time. So, we not
manually counting every step, rather we are
getting this through a recursive calculation.